# How to do stuff

## Run a Python script
To run a Python script using a particular run configuration, click the drop-down box near the upper right corner of PyCharm (to the left of the Play button and the Debug button) to select the desired configuration (possibly navigating a folder structure if appropriate), then click the Play button (or the Debug button).

Try running the `hello` configuration; it is located in the `helloworld` folder of run configurations.

If you have a new script and/or a run configuration has not yet been created for the script you want to run, click the run configuration drop-down box then click "Edit configurations".  Under "Python" on the left, you will find a list of existing run configurations for Python scripts; click on any of them to view or edit details.  Click on the + in the upper left, then click on "Python" to add a new Python script run configuration.  In the box to the right of "Script path", click the folder icon on the far right.  Find and select the script you want to run and click Ok.  Click Ok to accept the run configurations.  Follow the instructions in this section from the beginning.

To stop a running script before it finishes, click the red Stop button to the right of the Play button you used to start the script.

## Add a Python package
When you're told to add a line like `import numpy`, you need to have the package being referenced (in this case, `numpy`) installed, or else executing that line will result in a `ModuleNotFoundError`.  To install a Python package in PyCharm, first view the packages you currently have installed: click File -> Settings, expand "Project: scratchpad" (the project name will be different for different projects), click on "Project interpreter", and a list of installed packages will be displayed.  Many packages you didn't explicitly install will likely be present because other packages you did explicitly install depend on them.  To install a new package, click on the little + button in the lower left of the package list.  Start typing the package name to search for it, selected the correct package from the list, and click "Install package".  Close both dialog boxes when installation is complete.

## Start a mini project
While I recommend sticking with just one PyCharm "Project" (named "scratchpad"), you can create many "mini projects" inside it by creating a folder structure under the main "scratchpad" project.  To add a folder, right click on the folder you want to be the parent (like "scratchpad") in the project navigator on the left side of PyCharm, then New -> Directory.

## Create a new Python script
In the project navigator on the left side of PyCharm, right click on the folder you want to create the script in, then New -> "Python file", then type the name of your script and press enter.

## Use functions from other files
Unless a project is extremely small, it is common to group functions and other resources into separate files.  [`hellolib1`](../helloworld/hellolib1.py), [`hellolib2`](../helloworld/hellolib2.py), and [`hellolib3`](../helloworld/hellolib3.py) show how to call a function defined in a different file (with three different styles).  The "scratchpad" top level folder for this PyCharm project is a PYTHONPATH which means that folders within it may be considered Python modules (just like the ones you install using the process above).  My personal preference is the `hellolib2` style, but all three are valid.

## Find out where something is defined
In [`hellolilb`](../helloworld/hellolib1.py), it might not be obvious where to find that `print_something` function to see what it does.  Right click on `print_something`, then click "Go to", then select "Declaration or usages", and you will be taken to that function's definition in a different file (keyboard shortcut for this is Ctrl-B).  To go back to where you were before, click Navigate -> Back (or Alt+Shift+Left).

Note that you can use Ctrl-B to see the source code of many Python packages (specifically, the ones provided as code rather than binaries), though not generally `numpy` because so much of it is pre-compiled.

## Download a file to use in one of your Python scripts
When prompted for a folder to download a file into, select Home on the far left, then open PycharmProjects, then open scratchpad, then select the desired folder.

## Debug a Python script
One way to check the behavior of your script as it runs is to insert `print` statements and look at the console output.  Don't do that though; there is a much better way!  Tell PyCharm to pause execution just before executing a particular line by clicking on the gray space in between the line number and the beginning of the line -- this will add a breakpoint visualized by a red dot and highlighting the line red.  For example, try adding a breakpoint to stop execution just before line 4 in [`hello.py`](../helloworld/hello.py).  Now, instead of clicking the triangular Play button to run the script, click the Debug button (shaped like a bug) next to it.  The Play button runs a script ignoring breakpoints (execution like this can be much faster if you're trying to run something computationally-intensive like the RNN example below).  The Debug button runs a script with breakpoints enabled.  When execution reaches a breakpoint, execution will pause and the breakpoint will be highlighted in blue.

Down at the bottom of PyCharm, you will be taken to the Debug view (you're usually used to the Run view -- these different views can be selected at the very bottom of the PyCharm window).  The Debug view shows the values of all your variables on the right, and the "call stack" on the left.  When a function is called, Python keeps track of where it was called from as execution of that function begins (it gets added to the "stack").  This "Frames" view shows all the entries in the call stack, and you can double-click any of the entries to switch to that context (including the variables defined at that level).  `hello.py` only has one level (code in the top level script and no functions), but this feature is extremely useful when calling nested functions.

In addition to the Debug view at the bottom of the screen, when stopped at a breakpoint you can also put your mouse cursor over variables in the editor to see their values -- hover over `word1` on line 2 and you'll see it contains the value `'Hello'`.  Also, notes about variable values are shown in gray to the right of certain lines in the editor.

To control execution after pausing at a breakpoint, click Run -> "Debugging actions".  "Step over" is the most common action, and that will continue program execution until just before the next line of code is about to be executed.  If the breakpoint is set on a line that calls a function, everything in that function will be executed before the debugger breaks execution again.  "Step into" begins (and possibly finishes) execution of the line currently highlighted.  If that line involves calling a function, the debugger will break on the first line of that function.  "Resume program" continues execution until another breakpoint is encountered.  There are other actions, but these three are the most useful.

But wait, that's not all!  You can also execute arbitrary lines of Python while execution is paused!  After hitting a breakpoint (or while execution is paused for another reason), ensure you are looking at the Debug view by clicking the Debug view button at the very bottom of the PyCharm window, then find the "Console" sub-view button at the top of the Debug view and click it -- this will show an interactive Python console.  Just type any valid Python code and press enter to execute it.  For instance, while execution is paused at line 4 in `hello.py`, try typing in `print(word1)` and pressing enter -- the console will echo back "Hello".  Now try typing in `word1 = 'I will conquer the '` and pressing enter.  Nothing echos back, but the value of `word1` has changed.  Verify this change by clicking the "Debugger" sub-view button at the top of the Debug view and looking at the Variables.  Now, switch back to the "Console" sub-view ("Console" sub-view button at the top of the Debug view) and continue execution (Run -> Debugging Actions -> Resume Program, or F9) and see that the console prints a message about conquering the world now.
